Digital Preservation Plan & Guidelines

University of Cincinnati Libraries

Prepared by Sidney Gao and James Van Mil -- March 2020

Digital preservation efforts are vital to ensuring that UCL's newly
digitized collections remain accessible for future generations of
scholars and researchers. The Digital Content Team is dedicated to
ensuring that newly digitized collections are responsibly stewarded,
with the same care that is taken with physical collections. The Digital
Content Team also recognizes that immediately implementing
industry-standard digital preservation policies will negatively impact
the efficiency of digitization workflows, and is not feasible given
existing staffing and expertise. Instead, the team works diligently to
gradually and consistently research and implement standards set by the
[Open Archival Information System (OAIS)](http://www.oais.info/) and the
[NDSA Levels of Digital
Preservation](http://www.digitalpreservation.gov/documents/NDSA_Levels_Archiving_2013.pdf).

This plan outlines a progressive approach for supporting the digital
preservation needs of the digitized content stewarded by the Digital
Content Team. Further attention is needed to understand how to support
born-digital collections, which is outside the scope of this document.

For any questions about this document, or about the current digital
preservation plan, please contact the Digital Content Team at
[<digitalcontent@ucmail.uc.edu>.]{.underline}

Standards

-   **Open Archival Information System (OAIS)** -- The OAIS model for
    digital preservation has been widely accepted as the standard for
    repositories of cultural heritage digital content. Where some
    discussions of digital preservation focus on technology, this model
    equally emphasizes the importance of technology, management, and
    resources. This holistic approach will allow us to build a stable
    digital preservation program capable of growth, while customizing
    policies to UCL-specific needs.

-   **NDSA Levels of Digital Preservation** -- The NSDA Levels of
    Digital Preservation focus on the technical infrastructure needed to
    properly steward and maintain digital collections. Technology often
    overshadows other aspects of digital preservation for a reason:
    technology *is* crucial to maintain digital content. When used in
    conjunction with the OAIS, the NDSA Levels of Digital Preservation
    can guide UCL's digital preservation program.

-   **Digital Preservation Capability Maturity Model (DPCMM)** -- The
    DPCMM is an assessment tool that allows institutions to self-assess
    the maturity of their digital preservation program according to both
    OAIS and NDSA Levels standards. This tool provides detailed analysis
    of fifteen assessment points and suggests next steps to improve upon
    existing digital preservation activities. Following the DPCMM's plan
    for growing UCL's digital preservation program will ensure that OAIS
    and NDSA Levels standards are met simultaneously.

Challenges

The challenges UCL face in creating robust digital preservation
guidelines are not unique. The Digital Content Team has collaborated
with peer institutions facing similar challenges, and hopes to tackle
the issue with the help of the supportive academic library community.
While UCL's challenges are all interdependent, outlined below are three
of the most distinct roadblocks.

-   **Labor & Staffing** -- One of the biggest challenges we face is the
    amount of work it takes to research, create, and implement digital
    preservation guidelines and workflows for all newly digitized
    content. Limited staffing means that we do not have existing
    expertise to tackle all issues, or dedicated positions to focus on
    research and implementation. The Digital Content Team focuses on
    digital preservation peripherally.

-   **Expertise** -- While the Digital Content Team is dedicated to
    preserving all newly digitized content, members will require
    extensive training and research in order to fill knowledge gaps and
    gain practical skills for workflow implementation. Lack of expertise
    is a challenge tied closely to that of labor and staffing; the team
    is unable to dedicate the time needed to gain full expertise in an
    efficient manner.

-   **Funding** -- Digital preservation comes at the cost of more than
    just storage space for backing up digital content. The largest
    hidden costs of starting a new digital preservation program include
    professional development and practical training, in addition to
    labor costs for faculty and staff research & learning. Even with a
    gradual approach to research and skill building, time taken to focus
    on digital preservation is time taken away from other job duties.
    When the research and implementation phase is over, there will also
    be a significant amount of labor needed for collections assessment;
    this is a need that will grow alongside the growth of digital
    collections.

Strategy

The Digital Content Team assumes responsibility for digital preservation
and assessment of all newly digitized collections. The team's strategy
for creating a robust digital preservation program involves gradually
incorporating complex digital preservation activities into the list of
active responsibilities. By slowly fitting in progressive research,
planning, and implementation of digital preservation activities when
possible, the Digital Content Team can reach digital preservation goals
with existing staffing. Starting small and progressively building on
existing infrastructure allows the time for members to build theoretical
and practical expertise in increasingly complex areas of study, as well
as time for collaboration with peer institutions experiencing similar
challenges.

This strategy specifically targets the Digital Content Team's two
biggest digital preservation roadblocks: labor and expertise. It takes a
significant amount of labor to gain expertise in and build a digital
preservation program; spreading responsibilities over a longer period
allows the Digital Content Team to focus on smaller, more digestible
goals that build into a larger digital preservation infrastructure.
Implementing a slow, controlled approach to building these policies also
allows frequent assessment and readjustment, as well as time for
relevant professional development.

The sacrifice we make in implementing this strategy is that it will take
a significant amount of time for UCL to meet industry standards for
digital preservation. Given that we are working with existing staffing,
however, this plan allows us to set realistic goals that lead to
tangible achievements.

Guidelines

In accordance with the strategy of starting small, our current digital
preservation guidelines are written below. These standards will be
applied to all newly digitized collections at UC Libraries.

-   Preservation copies of all newly digitized content will take the
    form of Open Source Technology Neutral (OS/TN) formats only

    -   For most of our newly digitized collections, these formats will
        be TIFs and PDF/UAs

    -   Preservation metadata will be stored on CSV files

-   Preservation copies and preservation metadata of all digital objects
    in a new digital collection will be stored in a minimum of two (2)
    of these three locations at any given time:

    -   Phase One NAS

    -   Isilon storage

    -   APTrust

> In addition, both Isilon storage and APTrust regularly back up
> servers, providing an extra layer of protection against unexpected
> disasters.

-   BagIt will be used to create MD5 checksums for every new digital
    collection, and checksums will be verified after every file
    transfer.

-   The Digital Content Team will maintain documentation logging
    > permissions and access of relevant stakeholders.

    -   No one individual will have R/W access to all copies of digital
        content.

-   Due to our limiting capacity, minimum viable preservation metadata
    will be stored with each digitized collection:

    -   Reference, context, and provenance information

    -   Fixity information

    -   Content data object description

> Preservation metadata will be stored on CSV files and packaged
> alongside preservation copies of digital objects.
