---
layout: page
title: Digitization Selection Guidelines
permalink: /digitization-selection-guidelines/
---

Prepared by Sidney Gao and James Van Mil -- updated January 2021

This document provides guidelines for determining the suitability of a
collection for digitization by the Digital Collections Team, as well as
providing information to create a successful project proposal. When
combined with the Digitization Selection Rubric, these guidelines will
provide a structured, holistic approach to understanding the workflow
impact and potential value of digitization projects, ensuring that
collections will have a lasting effect on research and scholarship at
the University of Cincinnati. With some exceptions digitization should
focus on curated selections of larger physical collections. This will
ensure cohesive digital collections, and allow for a broad focus to
highlight our collections across different areas.

This document addresses selection for library-owned Special Collections
materials and digital collection building; it does not, however, address
selection for digitization for access, digitization for preservation, or
"digitization-on-demand" services, such as digitization requests from
faculty or researchers.  

### **Priorities**

These metrics will help to determine the value that the proposed project
will have as a digital collection in a UC Libraries repository.

#### Historic Use Patterns

The collection should fulfill one of these two criteria:

-   The collection has an *existing* user community whose specific
    research needs are fulfilled by the content being digitized

    -   e.g. The collection is frequently requested to use for reference

-   The collection has an *expected* user community whose specific
    research needs are fulfilled by the content being digitized

    -   e.g. The collection has been requested to use for reference by
        those who cannot access the physical materials

#### Critical Mass

The collection will be more impactful if it fulfills any of these
criteria:

-   The collection is a part of an existing digital collection in a UC
    Libraries repository

-   The collection complements an existing digital collection in a UC
    Libraries repository

-   The collection complements an existing digital collection in another
    institution's repository

#### Distinctiveness

The collection should fulfills these three criteria:

-   The collection represents rare and unique holdings of the UC
    Libraries

-   The collection has not already been digitized by UC Libraries, or
    another institution

-   The digital collection is not yet available publicly online (e.g.
    HathiTrust, Internet Archive, etc.)

#### Diversity & Inclusion

The collection will be more impactful if it fulfills any of these
criteria:

-   The collection is representative of the local community served by
    the University of Cincinnati and the City of Cincinnati

-   The collection is representative of minority or historically
    underrepresented groups

#### Object Preservation

The collection will be more impactful if it fulfills any of these
criteria:

-   The collection is extremely fragile and cannot be handled by a
    researcher

-   Lack of digitization poses high risk of information loss


#### Strategic context

The collection will be more impactful if it fulfills any of these criteria:

-   Works towards any of the University of Cincinnati [Strategic Directions](https://www.uc.edu/about/strategic-direction.html),
    including Academic Excellence, Urban Impact, or the Innovation agenda

-   Supports the work of the UC Libraries Strategic Sizing Charter (internal
    document)

-   Supports the [Pillars](https://libraries.uc.edu/about/strategic-plan/pillars.html) or
    the [Tenets](https://libraries.uc.edu/about/strategic-plan/tenets.html) of the UC Libraries Strategic Plan


### **Restrictions**

These metrics indicate challenges that the proposed project will pose to
the Digital Collections Team workflow.

#### Copyright

The collection should fulfill one of these four criteria:

-   The collection is in the public domain

-   Appropriate permissions have been obtained from the copyright
    holder(s) of all objects in the collection

-   For items where the copyright holder is unknown, an effort must have
    taken place to determine the copyright. Orphan works[^1] may be
    digitized, even if the copyright holder is unknown

-   If a copyright holder is possibly known, but not fully determined,
    then the item *must* be evaluated to be low-risk

#### Content Restrictions

The collection should fulfill one of these two criteria:

-   The collection does not include any Personal Identifying Information
    (PII), such as SSNs, birthdays, or medical information

-   If the collection does contain PII, the information can be redacted
    or parts of the collection may be embargoed

#### Accessibility Needs

The collection should fulfill one of these two criteria:

-   The collection consists of material that will meet accessibility
    standards when digitized, or

-   If the digital collection poses an accessibility risk, the selector
    will work with the digital content team to formulate a plan to make
    the resulting digital collection accessible[^2]

#### Preparation

The collection should fulfill these three criteria:

-   The physical collection has been arranged and catalogued

-   All items marked for digitization are in the desired order, and
    inventoried on the provided Metadata/Inventory spreadsheet

-   If additional preparation is needed, the labor has been identified
    and planned for

#### Metadata

The collection should fulfill these three criteria:

-   All digitized objects must have a reasonable amount of metadata so
    that the items are discoverable within a digital collection platform

-   Metadata creation is the responsibility of the collection selector
    or their appointee, unless a specific agreement has been reached
    with the Digital Collections Team

-   Metadata/Inventory spreadsheet has been filled in to the best of the
    selector's ability

#### Handling & Condition

The collection should fulfill one of these two criteria:

-   The collection is in good condition and has no specific handling
    concerns

-   If the collection is in poor condition, there must be approval and
    oversight by The Preservation Lab

### **Peripheral Considerations**

These metrics are not directly evaluated when considering a digitization
project proposal, but could affect project planning and should therefore
be kept in mind.

#### Funding[^3]

The collection should fulfill one of these two criteria:

-   The project does not require external funding

-   If the project does require external funding, the digital content
    team must be brought in when appropriate to help develop a grant
    application

#### [Capacity](https://uclibs.github.io/digitization-workflow/capacity-equipment/)

-   *In-house Digitization Projects*

    -   Digital Imaging @ The Preservation Lab is able to reformat
        analog book and paper media, including photographs

    -   Digital Imaging @ The Preservation Lab cannot reformat
        audio-visual media, such as 8mm film, 16mm film, or reel-to-reel
        audio

-   *Contracted Digitization Projects*

    -   For projects that will be contracted to a vendor, the digital
        content team will be consulted at appropriate project planning
        stages

    -   Appropriate quality control workflows and digital preservation
        plans will be created for files received from a vendor

[^1]: https://www.copyright.gov/orphan/

[^2]: This may require the commitment of additional resources from the
    selector.

[^3]: Please contact the digital collections team
    ([digitalcontent@ucmail.uc.edu](mailto:digitalcontent@ucmail.uc.edu))
    if it is unclear if external funding is needed.
