---
layout: page
title: PDF Accessibility Standards
permalink: /pdf-accessibility-standards/
---

Prepared by Sidney Gao and James Van Mil -- June 2020

The Digital Collections Team is dedicated to ensuring that newly created
digital collections are accessible to all users. This document addresses
the accessibility standards by which PDFs in newly created collections
will be held. These standards will not be applied to existing PDFs
ingested to a UC Libraries repository.

This plan outlines a progressive approach for supporting the
accessibility needs of PDFs stewarded by the Digital Collections Team.
Further attention is needed to understand how to support the
accessibility of born-digital collections, which is outside the scope of
this document.  

### The PDF/UA Standard

The Digital Collections Team will abide by [PDF Universal Accessibility
(PDF/UA)
standards](https://www.pdfa.org/wp-content/uploads/2013/08/PDFUA-in-a-Nutshell-PDFUA.pdf)
for all newly created PDFs. The requirements for PDF/UA compliance are
as follows:

-   Content is **categorized** as either meaningful content or
    artefacts.

-   Meaningful content must be **tagged** with appropriate semantic
    tags.

-   Tag structure must follow **logical reading order**.

-   Information may not be conveyed through visual means alone (e.g.
    font size or contrast).

-   No flickering, blinking, or flashing.

-   A **document title** must be given.

-   Document **language** must be noted.

-   Pictures must have **alternative text** (alt-text).

Please read the document linked above for more detail on the PDF/UA
standard.

### The Plan

The DCT will address basic PDF accessibility remediation according to
PDF/UA standards within the digitization workflow, but labor-intensive
remediation (such as transcription and providing alternative text) will
be the responsibility of the selector or project manager.

Labor-intensive remediation planning will be *required* for all project
proposals that contain manuscripts or visual-heavy documents (e.g. text
that references a picture on the page). This remediation will be done
during the final phase of creating a new digital collection through
digitization. Due to the amount of time and attention necessary for this
final phase, these accessibility remediation activities may be an
on-going workflow that continues after initial collection ingest.

The following section specifies the PDF/UA remediation activities
stewarded by the Digital Collections Team, and those stewarded by the
selector or project manager.

#### Digital Collections Team

Within the course of the normal digitization workflow, the Digital
Collections Team will:

-   Categorize all meaningful content as such

-   Tag all meaningful content with appropriate tags

-   Manually verify logical reading order

-   Specify document title

-   Specify main language

-   Set tab order that mirrors logical reading order

#### Selector/Owner

Within the final, on-going phase of digital collection creation, the
selector or project manager will:

-   Provide transcriptions for manuscripts within the collection

-   Provide alternative text for PDFs that contain important visuals

The Digital Collections Team is available to aid in project planning for
these labor-intensive accessibility remediation activities.
